---
title: "Birding the Philippines, 2023"
_date: "2023-11-05"
pinned: false
draft: false
reverse_sections: true
---

# 10/23–10/29

Arrived back at MNL late at night on the 23rd after a month in America. Early next morning, I was roused by the harsh, grating call outside my window of what I would later identify as the brown shrike, a winter visitor to these parts. Sleek and handsome, but apparently a "butcher bird." Immediately went out and began the week's birding.

My neighborhood east of the capital region is home to dozens of species due to considerable undeveloped wetland. Between the time I started birding in July and 10/23 I identified 12 species with certainty: Eurasian tree sparrow, yellow-vented bulbul, olive-backed sunbird, zebra dove, Philippine pied fantail, black-naped oriole, rock pigeon, golden-bellied gerygone, Java sparrow, large-billed crow, white-breasted waterhen, and crested myna (see also: [my running life list](/birding-life-list)). Most of these are common urban birds likely to be encountered as soon as one ventures out the door; some are not that common but can be expected to be seen with regularity. The golden-bellied gerygone is a particularly interesting case because its song is ubiquitous, but the bird itself is not such a common sight due to its small size.

It seems the experience I gained from all the birding I did in America paid off. Between 10/24 and today, 10/29, I ascertained 13 more species: brown shrike, white-breasted woodswallow, spotted dove, white-browed crake, common moorhen, coppersmith barbet, cattle egret, gray heron, purple heron, whiskered tern, red-keeled flowerpecker, scaly-breasted munia, and gray-rumped (or glossy) swiftlet. To these I might add a few more species that I believe I'm reasonably correct about, but do not claim certainty: barred rail, Arctic warbler, house swallow, barn swallow. In time I hope to be certain about them. And there are even more species I've sighted that I have not yet come close to identifying.

Of the 25 species listed above, my favorites are the yellow-vented bulbul, Philippine pied fantail, and coppersmith barbet. The bulbuls are abundant but always elegant and beautiful; one can never get tired of seeing them. The pied fantails, endemic to these islands, are feisty little birds with gorgeous tails despite their otherwise unremarkable coloration. The colorful barbet is the most visually striking bird I've yet seen in these parts. I have only seen them on two occasions in the same tree; I hope there are more of them.

The whole week I birded only my neighborhood wetland, except for this afternoon (Sunday, 10/ , which I spent at Heritage Memorial Park in Taguig. There, I met the president and some members of the [Wild Bird Club of the Philippines](https://birdwatch.ph) in a chance encounter. I saw the usual urban birds (tree sparrows, pied fantails, swiftlets) and a few waterbirds (waterhens, moorhens, egrets) but no new species.

# 10/30–11/05

The first morning of the week saw the newest addition to my running list of local species: a lone Philippine pygmy woodpecker, which I spotted in the same tree that I saw the barbets last week. I greatly enjoyed seeing different American woodpeckers last month see my – as of now quite modest – [life list](/birding-life-list)); so I'm glad that my own neck of the woods has its own species of woodpecker. Another addition early in the week was the little egret, distinguished from the cattle egret by its more slender build and dark-colored bill. 

Last Sunday morning, 10/29, a fellow birder found me and told me about some black-winged stilts that are wintering in the area. Wednesday morning, 10/31, I saw a small flock of them in flight over the neighborhood lake before landing and disappearing quickly into the surrounding vegetation. It was very fleeting, but they were very distinctive: long dark bills, orange legs trailing behind in flight. That same afternoon, 10/31, I returned to Heritage Memorial Park and sighted a couple of (what I reasonably thought were) cinnamon bitterns around the lake. Apart from that, the suite of birds is basically the same as in my neighborhood. 

Next day, the black-winged stilts were still there; I entered a construction site jutting out into the lake to get a better view. Other familiar sights were moorhens, gray and purple herons, egrets, terns, and swiftlets and/or swallows (any of which I have yet to identify with certainty). Also saw the coppersmith barbets again (8 of them) in their favorite tree; they seem to perch there only a little while, possibly only once every morning, before flying off together into the trees off the road.

Saturday morning, 11/04, I went on a guided bird walk with the Wild Bird Club around the University of the Philippines, a popular and accessible birding spot in Metro Manila. Crested mynas and black-naped orioles were abundant. Also saw three new species: long-tailed shrike (a local resident, even more handsome than the migrant brown shrike), pied triller, and, with some reservation because it was small and hard to see, pygmy flowerpecker. Happy to say I am now a member of the Wild Bird Club, which should lead to some interesting birding trips in the future.

Finally, this morning, 11/05, I identified a group of common sandpipers in the nearby marshes. Also saw a medium-sized brownish bird flitting around some tall grass; my first guess was some kind of grassbird, but I could not come to a confident answer; hope I see it again. In addition, it bears mentioning another highlight throughout the week, which was seeing more of the red-keeled flowerpecker around my neighborhood; a tiny but visually stunning species.

# 11/06-11/12

I continue to be surprised by the diversity of wild birds around my neighborhood wetland; though the rate of my identifying new species has slowed down since the last two weeks, I still never know what I might run into. Early in the week, on 11/06, I saw a small heron whose red-brownish head was poking out of some tall grass. Its head and neck was somewhat streaked, and it had a distinctive black-tipped bill. Several seconds after I spotted it, it flew out of its position and disappeared; in flight, its wings were all-white. I identified as a Javan pond-heron, a fairly common resident species according to my field guide.

Later that same day, while I was working at home, an unfamiliar bird perched on a telephone wire right outside my window. At first I thought I was finally looking at a kingfisher (which I had been wanting to find for some time); it had an overall blue-greenish color but its bill was noticeably sleeker and more pointed. I identified it as a blue-tailed bee-eater, yet another fairly common and widespread resident. I hope I see it again.

The next few days I expected not much, but as I was on my walk one afternoon a swallow glided overhead, from which I was able to clearly make out its deeply forked tail, indicating a barn swallow. Later, I was able to tell it apart from the Pacific swallow , another locally common swallow species. A point of confusion: my field guide, _Birds of the Philippines_ from Lynx and BirdLife International indicates House Swallow (_Hirundo javanica_) instead of Pacific Swallow (_Hirundo tahitica_). According to the taxonomic note on this species: "Previously treated as conspecific with extralimital Tahiti Swallow _H. tahitica_ ... under name Pacific Swallow." Tentatively, I stick to the (seemingly) more locally common designation of Pacific Swallow, but they are the same bird.

Friday morning, 11/10, I spent the better part of an hour following an egret around as it waded slowly across the lake and taking many (poor) pictures through my binocular; after consulting my field guides (here my North American field guides proved useful outside their jurisdiction; I have the National Geographic 7th ed. and _Sibley Birds East_) as well as other resources online, I became confident that it was a great egret. And finally, Sunday morning, 11/12, I saw for the first time a common kingfisher, which I was just able to make out in the distance.

# 11/13–11/14

Perhaps it is better to do these entries daily, or almost daily, rather than weekly so that I don't forget details. I don't anticipate identifying new species at the same rate as I did in the preceding weeks; but birds do not become less interesting just because I've seen them before. For example, yesterday morning, 11/13, I spotted a Philippine pygmy woodpecker in a different tree from the one in which I usually see them. While they are not abundant, they might be more common in this area than I thought.

This morning, 11/14, I received a spectacular lesson from the egrets in telling different species apart; it is really much easier when you are able to see and compare all of them at once. There was a great egret, in typical great egret fashion as I've come to know, wading slowly across the water; its very long and slender neck occasionally stretched out. Meanwhile, I spent a good amount of time observing two intermediate egrets – which I identified by their more rounded heads (more rounded than the great egret's), slightly stocky frames, and conspicuously black-tipped bills – chasing (?) each other and flitting around the lake; they are spectacular fliers, and one could never tire of watching them. From time to time, and for good measure, a little egret would show up, easily distinguished by its small size and black bill. Also present were gray herons, purple herons, whiskered terns, common moorhens, and black-winged stilts. All in all they make for a dazzling sight that makes me wonder what pathetic stupor I'd been in all this time not to notice that this place is absolutely teeming with life.

On my way back home, I heard an unfamiliar call in a tree, and saw what I'm all but sure was an an Arctic warbler (I had seen the same bird before), before it flew off and disappeared into a thicket; but I hold off on claiming total confidence in this ID, as apparently it is all but impossible to distinguish between two other locally occurring kinds of warbler: the Japanese and Kamchatka leaf warblers. I will be sure to be on the lookout for this bird next time.
