---
title: "October 30–November 5"
subtitle: Santa Ana—Heritage Memorial Park–UP Diliman
date: "2023-11-05"
pinned: false
draft: false
---

The first morning of the week saw the newest addition to my running list of local species: a lone Philippine pygmy woodpecker, which I spotted in the same tree that I saw the barbets last week. I greatly enjoyed seeing different American woodpeckers last month, so I'm glad that my own neck of the woods has its own species of woodpecker. Another addition early in the week was the little egret, distinguished from the cattle egret by its more slender build and dark-colored bill. 

Last Sunday morning, 10/29, a fellow birder found me and told me about some black-winged stilts that are wintering in the area. Wednesday morning, 10/31, I saw a small flock of them in flight over the neighborhood pond before landing and disappearing quickly into the surrounding vegetation. It was very fleeting, but they were very distinctive: long dark bills, orange legs trailing behind in flight. That same afternoon, 10/31, I returned to Heritage Memorial Park and sighted a couple of (what I reasonably thought were) cinnamon bitterns around the lake. Apart from that, the suite of birds is basically the same as in my neighborhood. 

Next day, the black-winged stilts were still there; I entered a construction site jutting out into the pond to get a better view. Other familiar sights were moorhens, gray and purple herons, egrets, terns, and swiftlets and/or swallows (any of which I have yet to identify with certainty). Also saw the coppersmith barbets again (8 of them) in their favorite tree; they seem to perch there only a little while, possibly only once every morning, before flying off together into the trees off the road.

Saturday morning, 11/04, I went on a guided bird walk with the Wild Bird Club around the University of the Philippines Diliman, a popular and accessible birding spot in Metro Manila. Crested mynas and black-naped orioles were abundant. Also saw three new species: long-tailed shrike (a local resident, even more handsome than the migrant brown shrike), pied triller, and, with some reservation because it was small and hard to see, pygmy flowerpecker. Happy to say I am now a member of the Wild Bird Club, which should lead to some interesting birding trips in the future.

Finally, this morning, 11/05, I spotted what I thought were common sandpipers in the nearby marshes. Also saw a medium-sized brownish bird flitting around some tall grass; my first guess was some kind of grassbird, but I could not come to a confident answer; hope I see it again. In addition, it bears mentioning another highlight throughout the week, which was seeing more of the red-keeled flowerpecker around my neighborhood; a tiny but visually stunning species.
