---
title: "November 15–19"
date: "2023-11-19"
pinned: false
draft: false
---

It has been four weeks since my all-too-short a trip to America. I miss New York terribly, especially Central Park, where I went nearly everyday and got to know many birds. Since coming back I've religiously maintained the habit of going out early every morning for one or two hours to bird. Though nothing in my immediate surroundings can remotely compare to a New York City park, I remain pleasantly surprised by the wealth of bird species within a half-mile of my house and continue never to know what I might run into. Since my last entry, I have ascertained five more species: striated grassbird, chestnut munia, collared kingfisher, cinnamon bittern, and yellow bittern.

All five are very interesting birds: the chestnut munia and collared kingfisher were both species I had been wanting very much to find around here, and both of them I sighted totally unexpectedly: the former when I went to check out a grassy site just beyond my usual range where a fellow birder I met last week told me she saw a Philippine swamphen; and the latter when I made a detour for no particular reason and saw it perched on a telephone wire. I have often made memorable first sightings in such ways.

The last couple of days, I spent some time studying the differences between two pairs of similar birds: 1) striated and tawny grassbirds, and 2) cinnamon and yellow bitterns. To the best of my knowledge, I have yet to see a tawny grassbird around these parts, but I've become more certain of my ability to distinguish yellow from cinnamon bitterns. Yesterday, as I was following a striated grassbird around, I saw a cinnamon bittern fly into a tree; the more-or-less even coloration was pretty distinct. Whereas today, I saw a pair of small bitterns briefly in flight, where the black in their wings gave it away that they were yellow bitterns. To top it all off, I got a good look at a beautiful Javan pond-heron staying still for several minutes.
