---
title: "November 20–26"
date: "2023-11-26"
pinned: false
draft: false
---

Things have slowed down a bit, but new first-time sightings continue to be had. Monday morning as I was walking toward my usual site, at a very precise moment, I saw a somewhat large, light grayish bird overhead flying towards the field on the other side of the road. I had never seen it before. As I looked through my binocular I thought at first that it was some kind of gull (which would have been very unusual), but when it got closer and I saw its black cap, I knew I was looking at a black-crowned night-heron (it helped that I had been reading my field guides a lot and studying the different herons that occur locally) just before it disappeared into the vegetation. Later that same morning, I saw a barred rail under a thick cover of grass; I had been wanting to find one for a while. It disappeared very quickly but it was easy to identify.

Later in the week, I got a closer look at one of the sandpiper-like birds I had been seeing regularly that were too far away to make out properly. Sandpipers, plovers, etc., are very challenging to tell apart. Whereas I previously assumed it was a common sandpiper, its longish legs and speckled back ruled it out; my best ID for it is wood sandpiper. 

Because I bird so much in wide open spaces I had been wishing a lot that I had a spotting scope, so I went ahead and got a little one (a Celestron Hummingbird) just in time for the holiday sales. Though small and not that powerful, it has been a game changer in seeing distant water birds in more detail than my 8x42 binocular can manage. My last certain first-time ID for the week was, as it turned out, a common sandpiper – clearly a different species from the other sandpiper I saw the other day.
